% Spatial Structuring of Climate Match-Mismatch in a Migratory Fish
% K. A. Chezik; S. M. Wilson; J. W. Moore
% September 27, 2017

\linenumbers

#Abstract

##Message Box
There is growing evidence that climate change is driving phenological shifts and disrupting species interactions. However, climate is changing unevenly across space and many animals migrate across great distances and environments. Spatial structuring of populations may influence their vulnerability to phenological mismatch. Here we demonstrate spatial structuring of phenological asynchrony in a migratory fish.

#Introduction

Climate change is disrupting the phenological synchrony of ecological interactions (refs). In response to rising global temperatures many species are shifting their habitat range towards the poles and the timing of many life history events towards cooler seasonal temperatures [@Parmesan:2003; @Root:2003]. For instance, of the 677 species assessed by @Parmesan:2003, 62\% exhibited advanced spring life history events while only 9\% suggested spring delays. Despite generally coherent directional shifts in phenology among species the magnitude of change has been variable [@Thackeray:2010; @Thackeray:2016]. Incoherent magnitude shifts in phenology increases the opportunity for mismatch between inter-dependent species [@Cushing:1990; @Durant:2005].

Climate change is occurring unevenly over space [@Bindoff:2013], leaving migratory species particularly vulnerable to mismatch [@Visser:2005]. Environments that closely track each-other provide the opportunity for biota to synchronize, allowing species to take advantage of resources over a greater spatio-temporal range [@Moran:1953; @Royama:2012]. As distance increases so does the likelihood of dissimilar climate shifts, possibly disrupting synchrony with important habitat and resources along migratory routes [@Durant:2007]. Migration timing plays a key role in facilitating synchrony with migratory resources and is largely controled by environmental conditions [@Crozier:2011]. Under climate change, plastic responses to local shifts in the environment can lead to maladjusted arrival timing along the migratory route [e.g., Visser:1998]. Similarly, depending predominately on evolutionary adaptation may make keeping pace with climate change a challenge [@Crozier:2008]. Migration timing is only one component of phenology. All recurring life cycle events (e.g., growth, maturation, reproduction) respond and adapt to the environment. The tension between different life stages, their relationship with the environment and the mechanisms that govern them must be considered together if we are to understand the impacts of climate change on species [@Mangel:2008;@Crozier:2008].

Mismatch has been observed in salmon population dynamics throughout the northern hemisphere. For instance, @Otero:2014 found Atlantic salmon are outmigrating on average 2.5 days earlier per-decade since 1960 in the North Atlantic Ocean, similar to findings in the North Pacific where @Taylor:2008 observed Alaskan pink salmon outmigrating 5 days earlier per-decade since 1970. These shifts in smolt outmigration appear to be widespread among salmon species and suggest rapid microevolution [@Kovach:2012;@Kovach:2013], driven primarily by increasing air, river and ocean temperatures [@Taylor:2008]. Shifts in migration timing impact whether populations arrive in the estuary when zooplankton abundances are high, the foundational food resource for outmigrating juvenile salmon.

Increasing sea surface temperatures are shifting the timing [@Richardson:2008] and abundance [@Boyce:2010] of plankton blooms worldwide. Although zooplankton are reaching peak bloom earlier, bloom date has become more erratic and the rate of advance may not be keeping pace with shifting salmon outmigration [@Edwards:2004]. Arriving when food is plentiful encourages faster growth which improves survival [@Mortensen:2000; @Scheuerell:2009; @Satterthwaite:2014]. Tracking the inter-annual variation in plankton bloom in spite of divergent shifts in climate between local environments and the estuary will contribute to the future success and persistence of some populations over others [e.g., @Chittenden:2010, @Malick:2015]. Thus the climate driven phenological shifts of some salmon populations may be differently able to match the oceanic climate phenological change.

Here we examine whether there is spatial structuring of phenological asynchrony in a migratory fish of economic, ecological and cultural importance. Locally adapted salmon populations spawn throughout vast river networks that integrate diverse climate variability [@Chezik:2017], however each aims to synchronize with the plankton bloom of a common estuary. By leveraging shared information across a river network and propogating cumulative impacts and uncertainty from the date of spawn through to estuary arrival, we estimate match-mismatch potential for xx sites within the largest salmon watershed in Canada. Ultimately we test whether populations whose climates are well correlated with the estuary demonstrate increased synchrony with zooplankton bloom.


#References
